# What are the respective roles of state and non-state institutions in socio-technical security provision in anarchy? Analysis of today's security provisions to identify security-relevant developments in today's socio-technical societies, where isolated analysis of physical and cyber security is not indicative.

## Abtract
Today, the UN-Charter-derived sovereign states' dominance in anarchy is taken for granted, including their constituting institutions. Much research addresses technology and Internet challenges. However, current research and existing theoretical foundations focus on how sovereign states can address these challenges, presuming that sovereign states and their constituting institutions (e.g., geographically-separated states, "traditional" separations of power) are suitable to handle these challenges. Yet, past international systems often lost their suitability when the world's conditions changed. More recently, the world's conditions changed again. Societies are no longer just social systems but socio-technical systems: the transitions and boundaries between real-world and cyber realms are fluid today. Impacts are reciprocal and omnipresent, without distinct transitions that could limit these impacts. Events in one realm affect both. This affects security provision, making social contracts to socio-technical contracts. However, legally-unprovable cyberattacks challenge the presumption of innocence while sovereign states struggle to develop, standardize and deploy secure IT infrastructures for their citizens: cyberattacks on states often exploit known (social or technical) vulnerabilities of software or software's socio-technical development/deployment environment. Yet, the Internet's complex globally-distributed infrastructure itself remains resilient, despite attractiveness for attackers: Linux kernel hacks could affect 51%-99.8% of the Internet's critical infrastructure servers, which "run the Internet" and process valuable data. However, Linux development, Linux's infrastructure-related deployments, and the operation/coordination of the Internet's sub-networks including technology standardization, are part of a transnational system with novel institutions avoiding social and technical abuse: the non-state institutional architecture that "develops and runs the Internet" remains largely self-regulated contributing to security provision in anarchy, where traditional state institutions struggle. My thesis focuses the respective role and behavior of today's institutions in socio-technical security provision in anarchy to identify false presumptions, indicate possible developments and indicate requirements for future socio-technical contracts: institutions make suitable socio-technical contracts and contract-
implementing organizations, not vice versa.

## Important note
This repository does only contain the abstract, the final section before the conclusion, and the conclusion of the paper. This means, it contains only page 1, 4, and 60 to 66 of the originally 76 pages.  

These pages contain everything that is still relevant. For more, see the follow-up paper [Linux is Law](https://github.com/py0xc3/PoliticalScienceAndGames/tree/master/linux-is-law)

## License
This repository and its content is published under the [Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International license](https://github.com/py0xc3/PoliticalScienceAndGames/blob/master/LICENSE.md).
