# Because Linux is law: mapping the socio-technical architecture around Linux and determining its institutional dynamics

## Abstract

International Relations, Information Security and other fields with security considerations take much for granted: however, traditional assumptions are based on social systems and environments, but in today’s socio-technical systems/environments, much has changed. Indeed, the security foundations and provisions at the most fundamental level, in anarchy, where we want to establish order through "sovereigns" (today, sovereigns are mostly assumed to be sovereign states with their given architectures), has changed: the Internet itself has become a new anarchy that needs order to achieve security, and any organization/society/state that has become dependent on the Internet directly or indirectly, exists in socio-technical anarchy, no longer just social/physical anarchy.

However, the "working", "running" Internet is taken for granted, while current thoughts of regulation and of achieving security only consider what happens on top of the Internet: yet, Linux is the kernel that drives the majority of the infrastructure of the Internet and on the Internet. Current regulation and security approaches that aim to achieve security take for granted what Linux operating systems and Linux firmwares provide. Further, much that has become a common demand and on which societies and states of today already depend on has risen in Linux (even states have pressures to adopt, e.g., Cloud technologies, which are based mostly on Linux technologies such as KVM): the new socio-technical anarchy consists of more than the known social/physical anarchy that we have to take as it is. Instead, it also consists of a new type of anarchy that is actively and intentionally developed by people, and the outcome is the "working", "running" Internet with its agency, which leads to notions of "security THROUGH anarchy". Indeed, even technical protocols and technologies depend on what the kernel provides - and that it is provided stably and securely and on time (which includes implementations of regulations, protocols or algorithms). In such respects, organizations like the "IETF" or the "NIST" illustrate overlaps of the two systems and their architectures.

People and organizations that develop the Linux kernel contribute to global socio-technical security provision for anything and anyone who/that depends directly or indirectly on the Internet (which makes its architecture a sovereign in some perspectives): the Linux architecture actively and intentionally develops and maintains some of the anarchy (which is "Linux" driven) in which further regulation and security means can be put in place, and both can be put in place only if/when supported properly by the kernel, while the latter already develops the anarchy of tomorrow, which shapes the regulations/means of the day after tomorrow (such as Cloud technologies). Yet, this does not replace the existing anarchy in which sovereign states remain important security providers, which also influence with today’s regulations what is implemented in the kernel, but assumptions that the traditional system of sovereign states and their architectures are omnipresently dominant introduces fatal presumptions for socio-technical security provisions.

However, while the majority of organizations and societies still struggle to achieve security when it comes to socio- technical environments, Linux remains capable to manage one of the most complex pieces of technology in history: it remains capable to persistently fulfill and tailor to demand, while it remains capable to provide sufficient security and stability on the most complex levels (both in the development stages but also in the resulting product). Indeed, solving security issues "on time" in these realms can be often a question of hours. The socio-technical Linux architecture is much more than just an organization that develops a technical operating system kernel. The architecture that develops and maintains the Linux kernel completely differs to other types of architectures. Indeed, it can be questioned how far it can be compared to existing thoughts of architectures, but also how far and when it can be distinguished from other architectures, and when there are overlaps or blurs.

I developed new approaches that avoid biases and prejudices: I "follow" problems during their processing in the Linux architecture and "follow" how/where these problems are solved from a socio-technical perspective, and I consider and analyze what appears on the way of problem solving, avoiding predetermined presumptions. During the "following", I focused on the institutions of Linux, which facilitate and foster solving problems. Determined by institutions, I derived "conflict actors" comprehensibly and reproducible. Indeed, determining the actual actors that are interacting and engaged in problem solving, and identify how and where they are distinguished from each other but also how they develop, is a critical task, whereas working with pre-determined and static actors can be itself misleading for research.

Further, I keep using the existing "secure by design" approach to evaluate socio-technical systems in a holistic way for their security provision: avoid single points of failure, and ensure intended input. Indeed, the architectures in the traditional system in anarchy often fail to meet these properties when they are exposed to socio-technical anarchy, where information technology can break the traditional separation of powers and thus create single points of failure, which might get fatal if complemented by inputs that are not intended by this traditional system.

Generally, the Linux architecture, which provides security at (and in) levels of anarchy next to other entities such as states, deploys no command-economy-based "separation of powers" but a competition-based "distribution of powers". At the same time, its institutional dynamics achieve that competition is among institutions and not among people, while people are major determinants of the organizational structures and boundaries but also of its overlaps. The stable balance of competition and collaboration has correlations to the research of AnnaLee Saxenian with regards to the Silicon Valley-related economies. Generally, much of the security provision and problem solving capabilities in the Linux architecture is shaped by the competition(s) of and in its institutional dynamics and in its environment.

Further, the institutions and their dynamics (and how they shape/determine/distinguish actors and behaviors) are not just strongly different to other architectures (including many different institutions that contribute to socio-technical security and stability but that have not yet been related to security considerations), they also achieve that known institutions/behaviors create different agency in the Linux architecture than in other architectures: indeed, a basic human behavior that is seen as major security risk in traditional thoughts about organizations/states behaves in the Linux architecture as a means to increase security.

Another difference is that security is no dedicated consideration: it is only about problem solving. Indeed, everything is related to some type of security, and dedicating security can thus be argued to be generally artificial. However, when it comes to privacy, there is an exception, a positive correlation: security dedication where privacy is needed, and no dedication where privacy is not necessary. Yet, the privacy needs of this architecture are much lower than in other architectures, while it has to be kept in mind that privacy needs of societies can also change formally and informally.

In the end, it can be argued that there are two overlapping but strongly different systems (so much differently constituted that they cannot be clearly compared with or distinguished from each other) that provide security foundations and provisions in and on top of anarchy. And it cannot be excluded that societies and organizations that suffer from security issues do so because they tailor to the wrong system "in" (or "of") anarchy, and thus adopting the wrong institutions, when they are exposed to the socio-technical environment of today (and its socio-technical anarchy). However, there are many open questions that future research has to answer, and vulnerabilities of the Linux system cannot be excluded. Furthermore, this project uncovered only small amounts of this architecture.

## Important note
This paper is a **follow-up** of: [What are the respective roles of state and non-state institutions in socio-technical security provision in anarchy? Analysis of today's security provisions to identify security-relevant developments in today's socio-technical societies, where isolated analysis of physical and cyber security is not indicative.](https://github.com/py0xc3/PoliticalScienceAndGames/tree/master/roles-of-state-and-non-state-institutions-in-socio-technical-security-provision-in-anarchy).

While **Linux is Law** is **partly** derived from the earlier paper and **partly** uses some of its findings/results, it largely obsoletes its predecessor. For deeper understanding of this type of research, it might be worth to review the *abstract* and the *conclusion* of the predecessor (both available [here](https://github.com/py0xc3/PoliticalScienceAndGames/tree/master/roles-of-state-and-non-state-institutions-in-socio-technical-security-provision-in-anarchy)), but the other contents of the predecessor are no longer relevant.

## License
This repository and its content is published under the [Creative Commons Attribution Share Alike 4.0 International license](https://github.com/py0xc3/PoliticalScienceAndGames/blob/master/LICENSE.md).
